Add metrics documentation (#9848)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/k8s/observability/metrics.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Metrics
sidebar_title: Metrics
description: Metrics for Consul on Kubernetes
---

# Metrics

> Consul on Kubernetes integrates with Prometheus and Grafana to provide metrics for Consul Service Mesh, including: service metrics, sidecar proxy metrics, Consul agent metrics, and gateway metrics. Service metrics can also be seen in the Consul UI Topology Visualization view. This section documents how to enable each of these.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consul on Kubernetes integrates with Prometheus and Grafana to provide metrics for Consul Service Mesh. The metrics available are:

* Service metrics
* Sidecar proxy metrics
* Consul agent metrics
* Ingress, Terminating and Mesh Gateway metrics

Service metrics can also be seen in the Consul UI Topology Visualization view. This section documents how to enable each of these.
```

* might be clearer with bullets
* should we link out to prometheus and grafana websites?
* what do we mean by service metrics?
* are service metrics viewable in the UI or are those sidecar metrics?

Author: Used these suggestions, thanks! And it is sidecar metrics not service, thanks for catching it!

> **Note:** Metrics will be supported in Consul-helm `0.31.0` and Consul-k8s `0.25.0`. However, enabling the [metrics merging feature](#connect-service-and-sidecar-metrics-with-metrics-merging) with Helm value (`defaultEnableMerging`) or annotation (`consul.hashicorp.com/enable-metrics-merging`) can only be used with Consul `1.10.0-alpha1` and above. The other metrics configuration can still be used before Consul `1.10.0-alpha1`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-> **Note:** Metrics will be supported in consul-helm >= `0.31.0` and consul-k8s >= `0.25.0`. However, enabling the [metrics merging feature](#connect-service-and-sidecar-metrics-with-metrics-merging) with Helm value (`defaultEnableMerging`) or annotation (`consul.hashicorp.com/enable-metrics-merging`) can only be used with Consul `1.10.0-alpha1` and above. The other metrics configuration can still be used before Consul `1.10.0-alpha1`.
```

* Use `->` to get the blue "note" box.
* versions should be >= than

> ## Connect Service and Sidecar Metrics with Metrics Merging

Reviewer: Before we get to the nitty gritty, what about a "quickstart" section that quickly shows the fast getting-started config with prometheus and grafana?

Reviewer: Also, what do you think about having two sections: one for users that *don't* have services with their own prometheus metrics and one for users that *do*:

---

## Sidecar Metrics

If your services don't expose their own Prometheus metrics then you can safely enable sidecar metrics:

```yaml
metrics:
  enabled: true
```

After installation, you will be able to view sidecar metrics in Prometheus and Consul's UI.

## Sidecar Metrics Merging

If your services **do** expose their own Prometheus metrics, then you will need to enable metrics merging. Metrics merging is a feature that enables Prometheus to scrape both service and sidecar metrics from the same port. This is required because the Prometheus pod annotations do not support scraping from two ports.
..

Author: ooh I like both of these suggestions!

> Prometheus annotations are used to scrape metrics. Prometheus annotations only support scraping from one endpoint on a Pod, so Consul on Kubernetes supports metrics merging so the service metrics and sidecar proxy metrics are merged into one endpoint. If there are no service metrics, it also supports just scraping the sidecar proxy metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus annotations are used to instruct Prometheus to scrape metrics from Pods. Prometheus annotations only support scraping from one endpoint on a Pod, so Consul on Kubernetes supports metrics merging whereby service metrics and sidecar proxy metrics are merged into one endpoint. If there are no service metrics, it also supports just scraping the sidecar proxy metrics.
```

The diagram below illustrates how the metrics integration works when merging is enabled:

> [![Metrics Merging Architecture](/img/metrics-arch.png)](/img/metrics-arch.png)

Reviewer: if you do re-do this diagram can you put prometheus at the top/left side since that's the first "step" in people's minds.

> Connect service metrics can be configured with the Helm values nested under [`connectInject.metrics`](/docs/k8s/helm#v-connectinject).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Connect service metrics can be configured with the Helm values nested under [`connectInject.metrics`](/docs/k8s/helm#v-connectinject-metrics).
```

> Metrics and metrics merging can be enabled by default for all connect-injectedPods with the following Helm values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics and metrics merging can be enabled by default for all connect-injected Pods with the following Helm values:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer: shouldn't we have `global.metrics.enabled: true` as well?

Author: connect inject metrics can be true on their own without having global.metrics.enabled be true. I'll add a comment here that it inherits from global.metrics.enabled.

connectInject:
  metrics:
    defaultEnabled: true
    defaultEnableMerging: true
```

> They can also be overridden on a per-Pod basis using the annotations `consul.hashicorp.com/enable-metrics` and `consul.hashicorp.com/enable-metrics-merging`.

Reviewer 2: We should also document the new annotations here: https://www.consul.io/docs/k8s/connect#available-annotations

Author: Yes thank you!

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~> In most cases, the default settings will be sufficient. If you are encountering issues with colliding ports or service metrics not being merged, you may need to change the defaults.
```

Maybe something like this to tell most people they don't need to grok all of this? Otherwise it's kinda intimidating how much config there is.

The Prometheus annotations configure the endpoint to scrape the metrics from. As shown in the diagram, the annotations point to a listener on `0.0.0.0:20200` on the Envoy sidecar. This listener and the corresponding Prometheus annotations can be configured with the following Helm values (or overridden on a per-Pod basis with Consul annotations `consul.hashicorp.com/prometheus-scrape-port` and `consul.hashicorp.com/prometheus-scrape-path`):
```yaml
connectInject:
  metrics:
    defaultPrometheusScrapePort: 20200
    defaultPrometheusScrapePath: "/metrics"
```

> Those Helm values will result in the following Prometheus annotations being automatically added to the Pod for scraping:

Reviewer: love this section!

```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    prometheus.io/scrape: "true"
    prometheus.io/path: "/metrics"
    prometheus.io/port: "20200"
```

When metrics alone are enabled, the listener in the diagram on `0.0.0.0:20200` would point directly at the sidecar metrics endpoint, rather than the merged metrics endpoint. The Prometheus scraping annotations would stay the same.

> When metrics and metrics merging are *both* enabled, metrics are combined from the service and the sidecar proxy, and exposed via a local server on the consul sidecar for scraping. This endpoint is called the merged metrics endpoint and defaults to `127.0.0.1:20100/stats/prometheus`. The listener will target the merged metrics endpoint in the above case. It can be configured with the following Helm values (or overridden on a per-Pod basis with `consul.hashicorp.com/merged-metrics-port`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When metrics and metrics merging are *both* enabled, metrics are combined from the service and the sidecar proxy, and exposed via a local server on the Consul sidecar for scraping. This endpoint is called the merged metrics endpoint and defaults to `127.0.0.1:20100/stats/prometheus`. The listener will target the merged metrics endpoint in the above case. It can be configured with the following Helm values (or overridden on a per-Pod basis with `consul.hashicorp.com/merged-metrics-port`):
```

## Consul Agent Metrics

Metrics from the Consul server and client Pods can be scraped via Prometheus by setting the field `global.metrics.enableAgentMetrics` to `true`. Additionally, one can configure the metrics retention time on the agents by configuring
the field `global.metrics.agentMetricsRetentionTime` which expects a duration and defaults to `"1m"`. This value must be greater than `"0m"` for the Consul servers and clients to emit metrics at all. As the Prometheus deployment currently does not support scraping TLS endpoints, agent metrics are currently *unsupported* when TLS is enabled.

```yaml
global:
  metrics:
    enabled: true
    enableAgentMetrics: true
    agentMetricsRetentionTime: "1m"
```

## Gateway Metrics

> Metrics from the Consul gateways, namely the Ingress Gateway, Terminating Gateway and the Mesh Gateway can be scraped via Prometheus by setting the field `global.metrics.enableGatewayMetrics`. The gateways emit standard Envoy proxy metrics. To ensure that the metrics are not exposed to the public internet (as Mesh and Ingress gateways can have public IPs), their metrics endpoints are exposed on the Pod IP of the respective gateway instance, rather than on all interfaces on `0.0.0.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics from the Consul gateways, namely Ingress Gateways, Terminating Gateways and Mesh Gateways can be scraped via Prometheus by setting the field `global.metrics.enableGatewayMetrics` to `true`. The gateways emit standard Envoy metrics. To ensure that the metrics are not exposed to the public internet (as Mesh and Ingress gateways can have public IPs), their metrics endpoints are exposed on the Pod IP of the respective gateway instance, rather than on all interfaces on `0.0.0.0`.
```

* there can be more than one gateway

```yaml
global:
  metrics:
    enabled: true
    enableGatewayMetrics: true
```

## Metrics in the UI Topology Visualization

> Consul’s built in UI has a topology visualization for services part of the Consul-Connect service mesh. The topology visualization has the ability to fetch basic metrics from a metrics provider for each service and display those metrics as part of the [topology visualization](/docs/connect/observability/ui-visualization).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consul’s built-in UI has a topology visualization for services part of the Consul Service Mesh. The topology visualization has the ability to fetch basic metrics from a metrics provider for each service and display those metrics as part of the [topology visualization](/docs/connect/observability/ui-visualization).
```

The diagram below illustrates how the UI displays service metrics for a sample application:

[![UI Topology View](/img/ui-topology.png)](/img/ui-topology.png)

> This could previously be configured via `server.extraConfig` but can now be configured under `ui.metrics`. This will enable the Consul UI to query the provider specified by `ui.metrics.provider` at the URL of the Prometheus server `ui.metrics.baseURL` to display

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topology view is configured under `ui.metrics`. This will enable the Consul UI to query the provider specified by `ui.metrics.provider` at the URL of the Prometheus server `ui.metrics.baseURL` to display
```

* I think our docs can be in the "present tense" unless they're specifically addressing upgrades.

service metrics. When `global.metrics.enabled` and `ui.enabled` are both set to true, the UI will display Prometheus metrics.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Should this snippet show a case when you want to override some of the values or set `ui.metrics.enabled` to false? It might be a bit confusing to readers because they might expect the yaml snippet to show how to enable this feature, but in this case, there's nothing that you would need to set in your helm config to enable it.

Author: I reworded so it would show how to enable this feature. Thanks for catching this!

ui:
  metrics:
    enabled: "-"
    provider: "prometheus"
    baseURL: http://prometheus-server
```

## Deploying Prometheus and Grafana (_for demo and non-production use-cases only_)

> The Helm chart now contains manifests for Prometheus and Grafana. They can be installed with Helm via `prometheus.enabled` and `grafana.enabled`. These manifests are based on the community manifests for Prometheus and Grafana.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Helm chart contains demo manifests for Prometheus and Grafana. They can be installed with Helm via `prometheus.enabled` and `grafana.enabled`. These manifests are based on the community manifests for Prometheus and Grafana.
```

These are designed to allow quick bootstrapping for trial and demo use cases and not for production use-cases.

> Prometheus and Grafana will be installed in the same namespace that Consul will be installed in and shall share their lifecycle with the Consul installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus and Grafana will be installed in the same namespace that Consul will be installed in and will be installed and uninstalled along with the Consul installation.
```

```yaml
prometheus:

>   enabled: false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  enabled: true
```

grafana:

>   enabled: false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  enabled: true
```
